Attack Techniques
The growth of the Internet has created unlimited opportunity for intruders to steal secrets, tinker with websites, abscond with credit card information, or just generally make mischief. Internet intruders have also spawned a whole new mythology. They are celebrated for their skill and daring. Some ascribe lofty artistic and political motives to these bandwidth banditos. But the professionals who install and maintain computer networks are not impressed with the activities of network intruders.

Just because you have a firewall doesn¡¯t mean your network is safe. The following sections explore some of the techniques attackers use to gain control of computer systems. As you study these techniques, you¡¯ll notice that many of the concepts are built around fundamental properties of TCP/IP that you learned about in earlier hours. The Internet literature is full of vague psycho-profiles of who these intruders are and how they think. Much of this information is based on anecdotes and speculation. However, there is general agreement that computer attackers tend to fall within the following broad categories:

Adolescent amateurs: These are kids who are just playing around. The so-called script kiddies often have only a rudimentary knowledge of computer systems and primarily just apply intrusion scripts and techniques available on the Internet.

Recreational intruders: This category of ¡°adult¡± attackers encompasses a broad range of motivations. Most are in it purely for the intellectual challenge. Some want to make a statement against a particular industry or organization, and others are disgruntled former employees. At about this same level is a new class of very sloppy, low-end quasi-professional ne¡¯erdo-wells who break into systems to steal banking passwords or credit card numbers, or to trade the access to a higher end pro for a per-break-in bounty.

Professionals: This dangerous group consists of experienced experts who know a lot about computers. They are hard to trace because they know all the tricks. In fact, they invented some of the tricks. These intruders are in the game strictly for the financial reward, but they wouldn¡¯t have gotten where they are if they didn¡¯t love what they do. Many of these professionals concentrate on activities such as credit card fraud and identity theft. A recent trend has been the rise of attacks on home computers to co-opt systems for the purpose of sending spam email.

It is impossible to describe all the various scams and tricks used by intruders to gain access to computer systems. As you read through the techniques described in the following sections, remember the most important rule of computer security: If you think you¡¯ve secured your network, think again. Someone out there is spending a lot of time and effort trying to find a new way in.

